If it's their fault that it's
Two. Oh. Hello,
Mr. Dorothy.
Um, you are becoming a positive, um, contributor
to this committee of this term.
Oh, good. Glad it's value.
Good. Hey, now we've got a few minutes with you.
Um, so would you like to start?
Sure. Thank you. So, uh, this is on behalf of the peace
and discernment, uh, collective.
Uh, and we've also, uh, resolved to give our formal support
to the submission of Gun Control New Zealand,
which is a decision we made at our February meeting.
Our organization's purpose
and role is to promote peace to discernment
and arms control, not only internationally,
but also through our RO New Zealand.
We are actively engaged in seeking the ratification
and implementation of the arms trade treaty,
and of effective gun control in Pacific Island states,
particularly led by Dr.
Rod Alley. Many states are unfortunately not yet,
members including Fiji Kiosh, Papua New Guinea,
Solomon Islands, Tong of Vanawatu
and Cook Islands, several of which have serious problems
with dangerous importation, availability, security,
and use of firearms, having neighboring countries
with a culture and history of ready access to
and use of guns, threatens their people and also ours.
In a similar way to the way these countries unwillingly
or unwittingly a host to international drug suppliers,
we should help resource these countries to ratify
and implement the arms trade treaty.
What our organization seeks to achieve is having countries
and societies including our own, where the threatened
or actual use of guns simply does not
and cannot occur in nearly all context,
including disputes within families, between neighbors,
over politics, race, or religion, or in antisocial
or criminal enterprises.
We see no legitimate reason for the use of any form
of guns within New Zealand urban areas, except
for very carefully circum circumstances
outside urban areas limited to pest control,
hunting within gun clubs, and by the police
and members of the armed forces, laws, regulations,
policies, and administrative arrangements.
Controlling the ownership use, storage
and control of guns should be such as to ensure
that guns can only be accessed the news in these very
limited circumstances.
The select committee should positively
and actively consider the newly enacted arms control
measures by the Australian Parliament to add
to this bill in subsequent implementation measures,
and I'll speak to those, their limitation on the number
of guns per owner should be applied.
New Zealand's case with a limitation of three
for recreational users
and five for primary producers and business use.
We should have stronger measures against 3D
printing of firearms.
The Australian Act now bans specifically bans accessing
or possessing digital blueprints.
Four. These, the maximum puration
of a firearms license should not be the 10 years in the
bill, but no more than five years as people's character
and circumstances change.
Import bans should cover all assisted repeating rifles,
belt felt, and, uh, magazines and pump action shotguns.
All individual gun owners
and individual gun users must be licensed over 18
and certified by two fully independent referees as well
as being independently interviewed.
The, um, we believe that having a special committee
for appeals from licensing decisions should not occur
'cause it would delay consistent decision implementation.
There should be separate registration
for each individual gun with a min maximum of five
or three such weapons On the circumstances said earlier,
this maximum could only be exceeded by license
and approved gun collectors
and museums, all of whose weapons must be removed,
rendered permanently and operable
and the rests in our written submission.
All right. Thank you very much.
Right, uh, I've got Ms. Nui Walters.
Uh, thank you Richard.
And just for committee members' knowledge,
this is a former chair
of the Justice Select Committee who's
presenting to us today.
Yeah, that's fine respect.
Um, so thank you very much, Richard.
Uh, you mentioned the comparator to the Australian scheme.
Am I correct that they were looking at changing the period
of the license down to two years?
They were, I think they ended up at three.
Um, but they're certainly a lot less than the 10 year, five
or 10 years in this bill.
So I think that five years should be the absolute max on
somebody's in particular circumstances
and then they lose their job.
They have a marital, serious marital problem
or something like that, and the whole character changes.
So shouldn't be more than five
and possibly four new licensees should be perhaps
around the two years just to check.
Okay. Any other questions, Mr. Scott Willis.
Thank you, Richard. Um, I note that you've suggested
that all individual gun owners
and individual gun users must be licensed
over 18 years of age.
We've also heard that, uh, that a proposal
to have effectively a learner's license between 16 and 18.
I wondered if you had any thoughts on the
merit of that idea?
Well, it's worth considering
provided there are adequate, um, monitoring
of the person concerned.
People change a lot.
I mean, between 16 and 18 years of age, as you know.
Righto. I think we're there. Hey, thank you. Uh, Mr.
Nordi, I hope you're enjoying only hung out if you are still
living down there somewhere. No,
No, no, no. We moved
to an apartment in the Central City, that's why.
Oh, you, you've moved Good old days.
She the wa mattar local board for a while,
but now I'm retired
and I've got time to make submissions on important issues
Like this. Excellent. Alright.
Hey, well thank you
for your contribution today.
Right now we're going to CVR,
um, right there you are.
Uh, we've got five minutes with you.
Um, we've, uh, seen your submission,
so if you wanna leave a little bit of time
for questions, that would be great.
Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you. Bu panelist.
Thank you bu Bailey and good afternoon.
I just wish to begin my submission by extremely bu members
of this panel for this opportunity.
So I hope you have read my suggestions and recommendations.
And again, the key objective
for which I would oppose this bill is my concern
around the proliferation of firearms
and civil space in the community.
This is not exactly a conversation about the arms race
or the geopolitical aspect about the military thing.
It's about my concerns around the legality
of firearms possession, civil spaces
and what might describe as community safety or compliance
or public interest in terms like these
within the bill and outside.
So I am someone who does not intend to possess firearms.
I live in Oakland Central and Mr.
Nordi knows where I live, and I do have
to remind the vulnerable members of the media.
And there are a lot of media reports when it comes
to firearm instance in my neighborhood.
The key proposal I would support in Isabel is, again,
the interac of new offenses around, again,
three printed ammunition
or, you know, future proofing the system, for example,
if it helps them, any physically harmful behavior.
Having said that, the other concern I would raise is
around the constitution of the proposed Minister Arms
Advisory group and how it can be depending on minister,
potentially be ideal ideologically misused
against any just like me.
So as a Kiwi Hindu in Oakland Central,
it's like the most culturally diverse urban neighborhood in
this part of the world.
And I do see around 200 different beautiful cultures, yet
people like me are actually targeted
for whatever reasons I would often empathize concerns
around, I mean, mass immigration or ancillary issues.
But
One demographic is That,
And, You know, that can be legal
or illegal depending on how the firearms can be licensed to,
well, this code does get more effective if I
and people of my demographic are to make a choice
between electing a coalition directing tide hate against
another coalition, which is perceived
as supporting violent extremism against my demographic.
Okay. So for example,
if my European Oakland Central has been labeled
as holding volume optimism, it's partly
because, you know, it's ly drawn from validation
of the sentiments, which things
are putting a gun to my head.
As a virtue, I am familiar
with some non-Indian New Zealanders
who instantly share the same one building
as the Indian consulate in Tamaki macro Oakland.
And they would tell me that some of the women supporting
sentiments like these are being virtue when they supported
target politic extremism against 600 Hindu men
and Kashmir Indian.
And that these violent exm provoked by the cast system
where the victims are being un fired and marked
before they were target point blank.
Now imagine if a minister from this I should background
appoint ID logs on this proposed advisory group.
I have concerns that both the program stance
and the anti gun stance would be illegally used to,
um, Hindu for, for example.
And similarly, another context in August, 2024,
where the head of state of the world's largest
constitutional security democracy was welcome in Oakland
market macro on state visit a prominent university based
campus magazine explored this.
Often you talk about how the cast system
of in the context of this,
Mr, Mr, I know you, um, I just, we're running out time.
I've got one question for you.
Do you wanna take a question or do you wanna finish?
I will really finish with my sacred time paying
for world peace, I would say,
which means may all peace suffer from illness, may
auspicious, may known suffer, may there be peace and peace
and peace and thank you nami.
Yeah. And I'm happy to take a question now
before the time comes out, just briefly.
Yeah, yeah. Mr. Todd Stevenson,
Todd Todd Stevenson from Act very quick one.
You seem to be suggesting that we make an amendment
to section 3 46 that would actually make public a register
of all licensed, um, gun or,
or licensed firearms, um, hold well people Yeah.
With a firearms license. Um, yes.
Do you think that create any con concerns?
We've obviously already had some high profile leaks
of the gun register.
Um, do you think that that could actually create
security concerns for people
who are registered firearms under
I I thank you for your question.
And I would say it depends on the identity of the question
and what the reputation of that individual is,
depending on the public domain.
Having said that, once again, it is a subject of concern
and in my case I would be answering question my perspective
depending on the identity of individuals,
but you would see a certain demograph of people
and that's how people around me would be seeing things if
that left, that is put out in the public domain.
But having said that, I would end off what you just put out.
Mr. Stevenson, thank you for the question.
All right. Thank you very much for your contributions.
This, uh, well this afternoon. Thank you.
Now we're gonna go to Mr. Lin.
I see you're on, um, screen, Mr. Lin.
Hello. Now we've got five minutes, so, um,
if you wanna leave a bit of time for question Me too,
we're gonna run out of time.
Yep. Un understood. So I'll very briefly give my, uh,
opinion on the arms bill.
It is a move in the right direction.
However, the two biggest glaring emissions from it is the
continuation of the register,
which based on other countries overseas,
namely Canada has not, uh, worked
to reduce firearm offending or crime
or stop any mass shootings.
And the second one is the lack of, uh, reintroduction
of cent fire, semi-automatic rifles that in my opinion,
were unjustly removed from the New Zealand populace based on
the actions of an individual who should never,
based on the New Zealand police's own requirements
to give a license, obtained an ACAT license.
I'm a licensed firearm owner, um,
and I leave the rest of the time open for questions
as I believe that's most productive.
Cool. Can I just go to the end of your submission?
You talk about there needs to be an agreed
and formulas way for the concern firearms owners
and clubs to raise these concerns.
What are you talking about once this law is in place, post
that ability to keep updating the firearms
register? Um, sort of,
Um, so let, let me, let me give the specifics of that.
Um, I have personally viewed two emails that were sent
to the New Zealand police by the, uh, club that was in, uh,
I think it was Christchurch, um,
for whom the Christchurch shooter was a member
of where they attempted
To, no, I think it's Dunedin, but anyway, yeah,
Yeah, sorry. Dunedin,
where they attempted
to reigns con raise concerns about his being a fit
and proper person, um, that did not appear to go anywhere.
Now, having worked in large corporate organizations,
I can understand that sometimes emails are sent to people,
they're not forwarded onto the right thing, they fall
through the cracks, that's fine.
Um, however, the agreed process needs to be if I
as a licensed farm owner and a fit
and proper person have concerns about someone else in their
license and wish to raise those either as an individual
or as a member of a club, I'm a member of my club,
uh, a local club here.
There needs to be an agreed
and formalized process by which those concerns are raised so
that they are taken seriously by the police.
Um, I dunno if you're familiar with the type of mindset
or person that tends to engage with the hobby,
but we are quite, uh, good at minding our own business.
And when we raise concerns about other people within the
sport, it is done so after a lot of due care and attention.
So if I say, Hey, I think
that person in my club has got a problem,
my expectation is the police take
that very seriously. Indeed.
All right, so former, let's get that point.
That's very good. I've got one from Mr. Scott Willis.
Thank you, Tim. So I see that you want to remove
and delete the register the gun firearms register in its
entirety and you make the claim that it's,
it's leaking like a survey, I guess.
Um, you don't quite see that, but yeah.
Why do you, why do you think that not being able
to locate legitimate firearms and know where they are
and who owns them would be a good thing and would increase
Safety with having,
Because they're never used in 99 point, 99.8%
of firearm crime is the short answer.
Um, for furthermore, if we do a quick, uh,
mental experiment, if I was to hold up a piece of paper
that says I own this particular rifle
or particular pistol, what is empowered within that piece
of paper that would stop me
or someone else going out and committing a crime?
And the answer is absolutely nothing.
Um, when the police hypothetically would be called
to my address, they don't need the register
because they know that my address is registered as the, uh,
domain of a licensed firearm owner.
So they would enter the premises on the expectations,
there would be firearms on the, on the premises.
There has never been, again, we look at Canada,
they ran the register, I think for what, 10, 15 years.
It didn't help solve crime.
We can look at the registers
that New Zealand has maintained, for example,
the ECAT Register or the Bcat Register or the CA register.
Um, every member of my local club, which
for references the new Plymouth Pistol Club,
has got anecdotal stories of the register being wildly out
of date despite the fact
that all the members keep meticulous records themselves
of their firearms.
So unless there is a specific scenario,
which can be a demonstrated, uh, theoretically
and demonstrated practically, um, then I'm opposed
to the register and the final nail of the coffin
because everyone always talks about straw purchases.
That's whereby someone who is licensed purchases a firearm
with the intent of reselling to someone who is unlicensed.
Uh, prior to the introduction of the register,
the police did on many occasions, identify people
who were committing straw purchases,
prosecute them as they should.
And so that scenario I do not believe justifies the
continued to distance the register,
including all the problems that we've had
with privacy, et cetera, et cetera. Thank you.
Very good answer Mr. Lin.
Now we're gonna move on, unfortunately,
but thank you for your contribution
this morning. Very helpful.
Thank you very much for the time. Appreciate it.
We are going to Mr. Vincent, uh,
Saunders again by Zoom.
Mr. Saunders, are you with us?
Good afternoon. Well, you are on mute. Can't hear you.
Well, you're not on mute. Doesn't look like it.
But we can't hear you. I'm just turning your sound off.
Still can't hear you. That looks like you're on mute.
Not working. This microphone might not be,
your microphone may be not on or you may have put headsets.
No. What about, we'll come back in five minutes.
Have we got someone else we can go to?
We'll get, just check your system. No sound.
Um, we'll come back in five minutes. Okay.
Let's go to, uh,
uh, presume it's a Mr I hope I'm right.
Um, SU Surman, uh,
hopefully they're available.
Okay. Are you with us?
Can you see me? Yes, I can.
Ah, yes. Hi. Right, we've got five minutes with you.
Um, if that's all right, just leave a bit of time
for questionnaire if you can. Thank you.
Just, uh, just a quick introduction.
Uh, my name is Radman. Can you hear me clearly?
Yeah, we can. Yes.
I'm originally from Indonesia, came here to New Zealand
around 2000, and I, uh, obtained my firearms license
around 2008, 2009.
And I love New Zealand, uh, lifestyle
'cause that, that's why I, uh, want to go hunting.
And on the firearm, uh, range, I met, uh,
people from surface rifles first, so I
become a surface rifle member.
I enjoyed the sport as well.
That's around two, uh, sorry, until I moved
to New Auckland around 2013.
That's when I joined Pistol Club.
Um, I was thinking of joining Pistol Club since, uh,
my time in Wellington,
but only able to join it, uh, in around 2013
because of how difficult it is
and how, how high commitment it's required to join, uh,
to do the activities.
And from then on, I do three guns, multi gun, I sick
and I, until the Christchurch, uh,
tragedy happened when, uh, we all in the club have to,
uh, give in, uh, give up our, uh,
sporting semi uh, rifles.
And I'm here in support of, uh, getting the
semi-automatic centrif fire rifles to the sport again,
as well as the, uh, semi-automatic, uh,
shotguns with the unlimited capacity to be able
to do the sport again.
Yeah, that's it my introduction. Right.
Thank you very much. Um, right, any questions?
Hey, well, I'll tell you what, it's wonderful
to have you submitting today, uh,
uh, on behalf of the committee.
Very glad that you have. Thank you.
Um, because your background
and also your interests, uh, um, provides a, a good context
for what you're suggesting or talking about today.
So thank you. Appreciate your time.
Thank you. Thank you. Now are we gonna go back
to Mr. Saunders?
Hopefully Mr. Saunders's got it right now.
Mr. Saunders, can you hear us?
So it's hard to work out whether it works or not.
Hello? Can you hear Me? We can. Unbelievable. Oh,
Fantastic. Thank you so much.
Right, we've got five minutes, so as you've heard, um,
perhaps just leave a little bit of time for questions.
Sure. So, so mine's quite lengthy, so I'll try and,
and speed for this as quickly as possible.
Look, I'm one of two over 230,000 New Zealanders
with safe fit and proper firearms owners.
I do support genuine ev evidence-based measures
that improve public safety.
However, I am deeply concerned that proposed amendments
to the arms act continue a trend
of targeting law abiding firearms owners whilst failing,
failing to address the real sources
of criminal firearm harm in New Zealand.
The reality of the world we live in today is
that firearms can be manufactured from raw materials using
widely available tools.
There are CAD files easily available for complete firearms
and magazines which are freely accessible on the internet.
3D printed firearms such
as the FGC nine have already been used
by non-state groups internationally.
And there is instructional material for improvised firearms,
which has existed since at least the 1990s.
Legislation that focuses on restricting compliant owners
cannot stop individuals who choose
to ignore the law from manufacturing
or acquiring firearms outside of the legal system.
Criminals do not register firearms.
They do not serialize parts,
and they do not comply with licensing requirements.
Number two, the illegal importation is
the primary risk vector.
There's over 400,000 shipping containers arriving in
New Zealand annually.
Only a fraction of these are inspected.
Recent examples demonstrate the scale of the problem.
There's been large scale con container imports
of firearms and ammunition.
Firearms have been concealed alongside drug shipments.
Organized crime networks exploit
international supply chains.
These seizures that have occurred have criminals, sorry.
These, these seizures show that criminals have access
to firearms, which is already occurring at scale
despite existing laws.
Further restrictions on licensed owners do
nothing to address this vector.
Two, the laws are being broken by those without licenses.
New Zealand has already an extensive firearms legislation.
The individuals importing, manufacturing,
or using firearms
for criminal purposes are overwhelmingly
not licensed firearms owners.
It is therefore unreasonable to conclude
that further restrictions on compliance citizens will reduce
firearms harm any further.
If the objective is public safety legislation must
demonstrably target those who pose risk, not who those
who already complied my recommendations, the administration
of the Firearms Act.
There is widespread concern within the firearms community
about the suitability of the New Zealand police
as the administering authority for firearms licensing,
evidence and prosecution
of individual New Zealand police officer criminality
and corruption alongside reports
of inconsistent decision making.
Disproportionate enforcement imp punitive responses to minor
or unrelated incidents have eroded trust
and confidence in the system.
And the New Zealand police.
Our recommendation would be
to establish an independent firearms authority
separate from the police responsible for licensing,
renewals, compliance audits, and suspension
and revocation processes.
The authority should include substantial representation from
experienced licensed firearms owners
who have proven themselves to be the safest group in
New Zealand with firearms.
And those who have the most to lose from misuse.
Two, the proportionality of penalties.
Current and proposed penalties do not sufficiently
distinguish between administrative or technical breaches.
For example, minor storage or transport issues.
Deliberate criminal misuse would be the other option.
The recommendation is to improve,
introduce tiered proportional penalties
that recognize intent, risk, and actual harm.
Not a one size fits all punitive approach.
Two minutes. Three. Yeah. Mental health provisions
are counterproductive.
The current framework discourages firearms owners from
seeking mental health due to fear of automatic license loss.
This hasten the unintended consequences
of driving the issues underground,
preventing early intervention,
increasing personal risk rather than reducing it.
And the recommendation would be to introduce safeguards
that allow firearms owners
to seek help without automatic punitive consequences while
still enabling intervention
where genuine risk is identified.
Good public safety encourages help seeking behavior.
It does not punish it.
The firearms register is fundamentally unworkable.
A register cannot capture illegally manufactured firearms.
Uns serialized 3D printed firearms
or illegal imported firearms.
Criminals do not register.
Firearms registers primarily catalog compliance
citizens not threats.
Moreover, the rep register represents a real
and evidence threat to legal firearms owners
creating a directory and shopping list for criminals
who do not access international chaplins shipments.
Five, family education, responsibility, firearms.
Mr. Um, Mr. So we're gonna run out of time.
Um, we've all read your submission, right?
So we're following it through with you.
Unfortunately run out time if I've got, I'm gonna take,
unless you wanna finish
with any your strongest point or whatever.
Um, look, I I, at, at the end of the day,
what we're doing is we are punishing people
who aren't committing crimes.
We are making new lives very difficult
and we're really harming, um, a community.
And, and, and this community is, is nationwide.
Uh, honestly, there's firearms are not weapons.
The only weapon that I I possess sits in
between these right in here.
And it's the same for every person
that I'm addressing right now.
Uh, firearms are tools and we need to be much more careful
and conscious of what we're doing.
Okay. Alright. Hey, look, I appreciate your submission.
It is a lengthy, we've all read it.
We've hit saw the nine
or 10 points that you've got on there.
But, um, thank you for your contribution this afternoon.
Right now we're going to miss, uh, Marie, uh, Russell,
which I think I saw you pulling up on screen.
Um, Mr. Russell, are you available?
Yes. Okay, thank you. We've got five minutes with you.
Um, please, uh, just leave us a bit of time,
otherwise we can't sort of, we've all read your submission.
Everyone's submission's been read.
Okay. We've got five minutes,
Koto, and thank you for this opportunity.
I'm a retired public health researcher
and I want to talk to you about hunting and meat.
It's appropriate here because there is a massive
and historic overlap between firearms and hunting.
Um, something relatively new is
happening all over the country.
Recreational hunters are donating venison to food banks.
You can read glow glowing stories online about this
and about how it's organized.
We're talking about tons and tons of venison mints.
Now, many people think of free range organic venison
as a luxury food.
Food banks are hard pressed to provide meat.
So this looks like a great arrangement
and hunters are really proud of their donations
and it enhances their social license to hunt.
But, but there is a problem.
Venison is, that's not traded or sold,
but donated is exempt from regulation by the,
um, ministry book Primary Industries.
NPIs advice on donating meat mentions two main
food safety risks.
One safety risk is bacterial contamination.
The other is what I want
to talk about chemical contamination.
And one of the three examples given
by MPI is lead from bullet fragments in meat.
MPI says, no assurances can be given about whether meat from
wild animals is safe to eat.
MPI says, if you eat recreationally caught meat, you do
so at your own risk.
You see the problem. Food bank users
really have very little choice.
That's why they're at a food bank.
And like many other people may not know the risk
of eating lead shot meat.
The danger of lead poisoning from lead shot meat is very
poorly understood in the community.
And sometimes hunters dismiss the very idea out of hand.
Lead is a significant neurotoxin.
There is no safe level of lead absorption.
Lead absorption is a notifiable condition.
So lead in your blood can be measured the blood lead level,
but in time lead moves into
and accumulates into bones and teeth.
It's only in recent years
that scientists have developed ways of testing
for lead in bones and teeth.
Now some hunters say, look, you just cut out
around the wound channel in the carcass
and you'll get the bits of lead out.
Yes, that reduces the lead exposure.
But much of the lead in cho meat is microscopic invisible,
and you can't pick it out by hand.
So thinking they're doing good,
hunters donate lead shot meat
and food banks gratefully accept it.
There is a risk that those most vulnerable children
and pregnant women are being unwittingly exposed
to lead poisoning.
Now, that's the problem. Uh,
but the good news is it could be easily dealt with
by a regulation requiring shot meat donors to use
non-toxic ammunition.
I acknowledge that non-toxic bullets are, uh,
more expensive than lead ones.
But non-toxic ammunition would solve this problem.
I would like it recorded. Please, that members
of this committee have been informed about the dangers
of eating lead shot meat.
And I respectfully ask you to work with, with members
of the health committee environment
to inquire into the practice of donating lead shot meat
to food banks and to regulate donations of meat.
I'm not religious, but I do remember a verse from the Bible,
uh, Matthew with the gospel of Matthew, if he asks
for bread, will you give him a stone?
Right, Mr. Russell? Yes.
Um, can I ask a question?
So I presume you're a food expert.
Are you or you're, you said you're a health
Research health. I'm a, I'm
a retired health.
I'm a retired public health researcher.
Okay. So just can I ask you the question
about lead poisoning?
You say that, say it's highly toxic.
So if you, if you shoot an animal in the neck and,
and it's, and no hunter's going to harvest meat from
that area because it's damaged,
but so if the rest of the animal is then, um,
butchered, if I can use that word,
how quickly does the lead poisoning, uh, cascade
around the body?
I'm trying to work out?
So, um, some of The timing issue of that,
Some of the research I've seen says
that these microscopic pieces of lead can be within
it's in inches because
that's us research 18 inches from the,
where the bullet goes in.
So these microscopic pieces do
spread out throughout the body.
So cutting, cutting out the wound channel even,
you know, for a few
Cutting out the, sorry, Cut,
cutting out the wound channel
where the bullets gone into the, into the animal.
You can cut out around that.
But there are still microscopic pieces
elsewhere in the meat. And, um,
That spreads up to 18 inches. Mm
Okay. Whatever that is
in centimeters.
Um, have you, I've never seen evidence for that,
but anyway, that's a, but there's plenty
of research written about that.
Yeah. Very good. Hey, now we've run outta time,
but thank you for your submission.
It's a little bit different from your written submission,
but that's, you've taken us in a different path.
Hey, thank you for your contribution today. Thank you.
Alright, goodbye. Right now we've got Mr.
Hugh Shields in person.
In person. Yep. Uh, I'm you trial Hugh Shields, um,
67-year-old male,
had a firearms license since I'm 16 years old,
own about 10 rifles full-time pest control shoot under the
name of Eco hunters.
So I killed pest animals.
Uh, been operating that business for five years, since 2020.
COVID came. New job, new career direction, pest control.
Um, shot over somewhere near 12, 13,000 animals.
Uh, in that last few years. Um, I don't
A year, pardon me, a year or
Since I started 12. Uh, like
So about a thousand a year.
I'll say that. That's more than that. Five years.
12,000. Oh, five years. That's 2000 a year.
Two and a half thousand a year. Yeah.
I've got probably where I've shot 3000 rabbits,
2000 rabbits and 1000 rabbits.
Um, so reasonably busy.
Probably come from a different perspective to most
of these people here who, um, go to a range once a year
and shoot a few bits of cardboard.
I don't do cardboard. I only do beating hearts.
Um, the, um, firearms register, huge supporter
of the firearms register.
Huge supporter as we, 'cause I'm an old fella.
When I first got my guns from the guns within ro I had taken
down to the winning central police station wearing Taylor
Street, meet the firearms officer, look him in the eye.
He could see if there was any madness in my eye.
He could assess me as being fit and proper.
He could issue me. So there was that relationship,
which was really, really critical.
Uh, we've lost that. Um, but I fully support
and people in this area, on the TV
and on websites for two knee jerk reaction.
Um, bad, you know, all that stuff. It's, it's b******s.
Um, the fact of the matter is that the implement,
the re-implementation of the status quo,
which was a registry, which was abolished in 1983,
is a safeguard for the committee.
An absolutely essential tool going forward.
Um, I have no questions with it whatsoever.
I buy and sell firearms, have beautiful transactions
with a firearm safety authority.
Because of my role.
I'm talking to the police on a daily basis, advising them
of taking out activity reports.
Activity reports is, um, start time, finish time.
How many are hunting various markings, things like that.
Where you're gonna be, this is to safeguard the public.
So if somebody frames up as man on the hill with a gun,
they can refer to the police.
They know it's me. Uh, so it gives community safety.
Um, it also gives the police safety that they know
who in their ne neck of the woods what's going on.
And it also gives me safety that at the end of the day,
if I say go to midnight, hundred till midnight
or 2:00 AM they will call me within 15
to 20 minutes from the police comms team
and say, have you finished?
I'll be signing you off. And,
and that ensures that I haven't shot myself in the foot
and died in a ditch somewhere in a paddock,
and that I've got home safely.
This is a very, very good system. We have.
Um, I've bought, bought and sold firearms onto registry.
I have absolutely no problem with that.
All those transactions have been seamless
and basically Perfect.
Um, that's for three minutes questions. Oh, right. Good.
We've got one from Mr. Scott, uh, Willis.
Thank you. And, um, we've heard from the minister
that there's an attention to perhaps
allow semi-automatic cent fire weapons back
in special special cases.
And I note that you, you've, you've, you,
you've made a point that this is something
that only really applies to a very small minority of people
who claim to do a sport and,
and is against, um, public safety.
Would you like to expand on that?
This is not the tail wagging the dog.
This is the flea on the dog wagging the tail,
which then goes through to Kofu.
And when I refer to Kofu, I would say Kofu, Nicole McKee
act, Hugh de
and the other fellow who was here, the, on the,
on the speaking, the in interlinked at the hip.
They need to be surgically removed from each other. Yeah.
Let, let's not go there. We've got a question, but
We are interested in your comments
on No, I don't, I don't No, no.
The question was a good one and this is
Good. Yeah. The question is good and
don't kind
because that's my thing.
Uh, answer the question would be helpful.
Sorry, did I miss the question? No, I think, I think
If you hadn't answered right, I'm gonna go to Honorable,
uh, Jenny Anderson. Um,
Thank you for submitting really
interesting what your work is.
Um, we, we've had a bit of a pushback from some people
who think the registry is a risk.
Okay. Um, interested to know
what you think should be done to encourage
Thank you Jenny. Perfect
Question. More people
Registering. That's actually my next point.
Okay.
So everybody who's on this thing up here will tell you that
registering your firearms is two things.
It's a shopping list for criminals to come
and buy you to, to target you.
It is also a route to conversation confiscation.
We've had a firearms registry
for pistols since the early 19 hundreds.
It has not led to confiscation.
It's led to better, better community security.
Yes, any database can be a victim of a black swan event
as can, but you don't need to go to that.
If you look at this list here, no, hang on, I'll leave that.
But now I'll, I'll do this bit for Jenny.
Um, on this list here,
there's 222,000 license firearms only.
This is the list from, um, firearm safety
or authority data base.
This is the data that's put up each month at the end
of the month to tell you how many people are registered.
Right? How many people own files? Yeah, yeah.
How many are registered, what ethnicity, gender, et cetera.
And geographic distribution in the 12
or 14 police states, police, uh, regions.
Um, so on this,
we've got 223,000 people registered as firearms owners.
We've got 127,000 people
who have actually registered their firearms.
Now, in percentage terms, that's simply not good enough.
That means there's out of 222,000 people,
there's 95,000 people out there
who have not licensed their firearms. But
They may not have a firearm.
Pardon me? They may not have a firearm.
Good point. Um, the, um, the, uh, that's
The five minute by note that That's the, um, sorry.
And so I, I believe the, the process has gotta be this
with regard to leaking names out of the FireEye registry.
You don't need to go to the FireEye registry to do that.
Go to the KOFU website.
They, it printed
6,897 names
of licensed firearms owners in New Zealand
who have supported their submission.
You don't need to go to K and the police thing.
Just go to the website, download it, have a look at it.
Well, I take on that note.
Um, we should, we should finish this
because I think we're ahead.
All right. Hey, thank honestly, it's a
Point of clarification because No, no,
I just wanna make sure 'cause you Right.
But you're actually describing a, you were saying go back
to the 1983 registry system where it was more localized.
That's what I understood you actually saying. Where you, the
1980 C3 System
where you turned up at the police station
Was ized. Yeah.
So you had to go to the police station,
you took your firearm and they wrote down all your details.
Yeah. Um, obviously we're not gonna go
to a paper eye system, we're gonna No, no, no.
A computerized system, which will be nationwide.
It doesn't really matter where it is.
I mean, it's just a phone call.
Do not try to do, register your firearms online.
The online system is a cluster. Yeah. Go and talk.
Make a list of your firearms.
Pick up the phone call the Firearm Safety authority.
That's right. That's I do on the
Phone's. Important. Something different.
Yeah. Right.
Thank, Hey, thank you. Nationwide.
Right. Hey, thank you Mr. Shields.
Great that you've turned up
and thank you for your experience and thank you.
Explain right now I believe you must be Miss Kay Jones.
Well,
That that's fine.
Lovely hearing from you too,
because we found out we went to high school.
Oh, same classes. Well, you know,
know in the justice committee,
everything, all you back together.
Yeah, absolutely. We haven't had a marriage
yet, but we're getting close.
No, no. We're, I think we've both got,
um, our own spouses. So they a
No, I didn't mean, I didn't mean
Early in the day though.
Well, I supported,
I supported marriage equality, but we're not going for,
You always have to point out
that Trevor Mellard went there.
Okay. Let's please move on. Sorry. Ms. K Jones.
We are looking forward to your submission. Okay.
It's been a fun morning
Care committee.
Um, you've read my submission, which
of course was written in a bit of haste
because we've got so much on
and having watched all of the submissions, um,
earlier in the week are diligent that you're listening to.
Yeah. Um, I've gone back to the, um, the bill
and thought about some more.
And so I want to share some additional points.
Um, um, for a start out, I'm not opposed to the sale
and use of gun use.
Um, uh, before, when I trained as a teacher,
I had education in using a rifle as part
of outdoor education.
My uncle was working with a
and fish, he did pest control in the wire wrapper.
He wrote guidance on how to be safe.
Um, you know, it's about safety
and especially in the rural community, guns are great tools
for controlling rabbits and the rest.
Yeah. But I'm also, as you've seen for my submission,
very concerned about safety.
The safety of gun users, the people that gun users know,
friends, family, those they go on trips with.
And also the people who are not known to gun nun
but may be targeted as groups
because of some animus they have, as
with the case in Christchurch with the group of Muslims
who are targeted, not because of being known to the shooter,
but 'cause of representing a group.
So in each of those cases, there's what can be done
to improve safety.
So looking at the bill,
I started thinking about other licensing regimes
that we've got for, um, matters
that can be dangerous like cars.
So we have a driver's licensing regime,
which includes learner licensing, which includes training,
which has a way of testing
to see if people have got the skills
to operate the, the tool.
And I really support that idea of having training
and learner licensing to make sure
that people have got things.
I mean, like you, Andrew
as a 14-year-old might not have shot your brother in the leg
had you sort of had some of those, um, extra tips.
Um, but we'll leave that one side.
I'm sure that's a, that's long under the, the bridge.
But the, the area of keeping safe people who are known
to gun users reminds me of alcohol licensing.
Where in that system
there is a public notice requirement when someone says we
want to run a, um, cell
alcohol from our dairy or whatever.
Locals have got the opportunity
to raise any concerns about is this too close to a school?
Is there anything else like that section 69 of the guns bill
that we've got has areas about
people can ask why did you decline?
Or why did you put conditions on turning me
down for a license?
But there isn't a provision for people
to say why someone should be turned down to maplin.
Sort of raised the issue of other gun users saying, Hey,
that person does not fit in proper with the
district licensing system for alcohol there.
As well as the public notice.
There is also input required from the local police
and from the medical officer of health so
that there can be issues raised, um, on whether
it is safe and appropriate.
I would like to see a licensing system that has some form
of public notice,
or it could be even by a register for, say the local, um,
sex abuse prevention network can register with the police
to say, Hey, that chap
who under the terms is beating the wife,
but they haven't reported it 'cause they're too scared.
That person may not be safe to be a gun licensed owner.
Okay, cool. So we'll stop there 'cause I saw
Your signal. Yeah, uh, literally.
Um, and just we're running outta time.
We've got question time. That's why I'm worried about this.
Yep. You know, any questions? Good submission. I thank you.
Great. Okay. Right, last one from Mr. Scott, uh, Willis.
Thank you very much. So very pleased to see
that you want the ban,
the firm ban on semi-automatic firearms.
Mm-hmm. So essentially you want to make sure
that the minister can't carve them out somehow some
Way. We, we've
had talk about guns as tools, guns
as sporting implements, and as recreation.
Now in the case of tools, pest control,
there may be a very limited area in which like
hundreds of rats in an area you might have it.
But that's about the only test case that I can think of
where you would need the range
of semi-automatic firing that speed.
Because those who are professional PEs, um, sort
of controllers and like who can probably dip in here, um,
their capacity
to control 'em may actually rely on having more than one
weapon ready, loaded if they're in that situation.
Rabbits, rats. But for the person who is doing it
for recreational enjoyment, the focus should, in my view,
shift to are they showing skill, you know, like the old day
of William tell and doing the, the sort of, you know, center
of the, the, um, the, the target.
Is it skill? Is it speed?
Is what is the, is is being actual done.
You know, like I'm not a gun user.
I sometimes think, oh, I should be,
but you know, my targets might not be appropriate.
Um, especially in the city environment.
So yeah, I, I would like there
to be a ban on semi-automatic.
Right. Thank You. The, the, the reasons
to justify it aren't great enough.
Alright. Hey, thank you very much for your contribution.
Um, we've got a rush into the house as you heard the, uh,
s have we got anything else?
I'll see you next week anyway for the next
Bill. Okay.
Uh, not nearly, not really business.
I have to clear the room. We might just have
to clear the room here moment.
Thank you. You.